Add section for RHEL8to9 in-place upgrade using LEAPP (#3055)
theforeman/foreman-documentation: guides/common/modules/proc_upgrading-project-or-proxy-in-place-using-leapp.adoc

[id="upgrading-{project-context}-or-proxy-in-place-using-leapp_{context}"]
= Upgrading {Project} or {SmartProxy} to {EL} 9 In-Place Using Leapp

Use this procedure to upgrade your {Project} or {SmartProxy} installation from {EL} 8 to {EL} 9.

.Prerequisites
* {Project} {ProjectVersion} or {SmartProxy} {ProjectVersion} running on {EL} 8.

> ifdef::foreman-el,katello[]
> * {Project} or {SmartProxy} installations running on CentOS 8 can be upgraded to CentOS Stream 9 or a {RHEL} rebuild.
> * {Project} or {SmartProxy} installations running on {RHEL}8 can be upgraded to {RHEL} 9.
> endif::[]

Reviewer: 7to8 we supported these cross-grades, I'd avoid them in 8to9, so:
```suggestion
```

endif::[]

ifeval::["{mode}" == "disconnected"]
.Prerequisites for Disconnected Environment
If you run {Project} in a disconnected environment, ensure it also meets the following prerequisites:

* You require access to {RHEL} and {Project} packages.
Obtain the ISO files for {RHEL} 9 and {Project}.
For more information, see xref:upgrading_a_disconnected_satellite[]. <<<<<Change link>>>>>
* For more information on customizing the Leapp upgrade for your environment, see https://access.redhat.com/articles/4977891[Customizing your {RHEL} in-place upgrade].
* Since Leapp completes part of the upgrade in a container that has no access to additional ISO mounts, the repositories cannot be served from a locally mounted ISO but must be delivered over the network from a different machine.
* For more information, see https://access.redhat.com/solutions/7030156[How to in-place upgrade an offline / disconnected RHEL 8 machine to RHEL 9 with Leapp?]
endif::[]

ifdef::satellite[]
[NOTE]
====
* {Project} supports DEFAULT and FIPS crypto-policies.
The FUTURE crypto-policy is not supported for {Project} and {SmartProxy} installations.

> * In-place upgrade of {EL} systems in FIPS mode is not supported by {Team}.
> Turning FIPS off, upgrading from {EL} 8 to {EL} 9, and then turning FIPS on is not supported either.
> Instead, migrate your {Project} {ProductVersion} to a freshly installed {EL} 8 system with FIPS mode enabled.
> For more information, see xref:migrating-{project-context}-to-a-new-el-system_{context}[]. <<<<<check link>>>>>

Reviewer: FIPS is supported now, so:
```suggestion
```

====
endif::[]

.Procedure
. Configure the repositories to obtain Leapp.
ifdef::foreman-el,katello[]
+

> On CentOS, configure the https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/g/theforeman/leapp/[@theforeman/leapp COPR Repository], which contains newer Leapp packages than those shipped by https://wiki.almalinux.org/elevate/[AlmaLinux/ELevate], and support {Project} or {SmartProxy} upgrades:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On CentOS, configure the https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/g/theforeman/leapp/[@theforeman/leapp COPR Repository], which contains Leapp packages with patches to support {Project} or {SmartProxy} upgrades:
```

Let's not mention ELevate, the packages are not based on those anymore.

+
----

> # curl -o /etc/yum.repos.d/theforeman-leapp.repo https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/g/theforeman/leapp/repo/epel-7/group_theforeman-leapp-epel-7.repo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# curl -o /etc/yum.repos.d/theforeman-leapp.repo https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/g/theforeman/leapp/repo/epel-8/group_theforeman-leapp-epel-8.repo
```

----
endif::[]

> +
> On {RHEL}, enable the `rhel-9-server-extras-rpms` repository:
> +
> ----
> # subscription-manager repos --enable=rhel-9-server-extras-rpms
> ----

Reviewer: There is no more extras, Leapp is in BaseOS. So
```suggestion
```

. Install required packages:
[options="nowrap", subs="+quotes,verbatim,attributes"]
+
----

> # {package-install-project} leapp leapp-repository

Reviewer: package got renamed

```suggestion
# {package-install-project} leapp leapp-upgrade-el8toel9
```

----
ifdef::satellite[]

> . Set up the following repositories to perform the upgrade in a disconnected environment:

Reviewer: I think this can be hidden behind a `ifeval::["{mode}" == "disconnected"]`, right?

> .. `/etc/yum.repos.d/rhel8.repo`:

Reviewer: this, and also several later places, refer to rhel8 while it should be rhel9 :)

+
[options="nowrap", subs="+quotes,verbatim,attributes"]
----
[BaseOS]
name={RepoRHEL8BaseOS}
baseurl=http://_server.example.com_/rhel9/BaseOS/

[AppStream]
name={RepoRHEL8AppStream}
baseurl=http://_server.example.com_/rhel9/AppStream/
----
.. `/etc/yum.repos.d/{project-context}.repo:`
+
[options="nowrap", subs="+quotes,verbatim,attributes"]
----
[{RepoRHEL8ServerSatelliteServerProductVersion}]
name={RepoRHEL8ServerSatelliteServerProductVersion}
baseurl=http://_server.example.com_/sat6/Satellite/

[{RepoRHEL8ServerSatelliteMaintenanceProductVersion}]
name={RepoRHEL8ServerSatelliteMaintenanceProductVersion}
baseurl=http://_server.example.com_/sat6/Maintenance/
----
endif::[]

ifdef::foreman-el,katello[]
. Install additional OS specific packages (`leapp-data-almalinux` for AlmaLinux, `leapp-data-centos` for CentOS Stream, or `leapp-data-rocky` for Rocky Linux).
Note that this is not required for {RHEL} based installations.
+
----
# yum install leapp-data-centos

> ----

Reviewer: note to @evgeni - this package doesn't exist in the el8 repo today, but we need to do something about it

baseurl=https://yum.theforeman.org/pulpcore/{PulpcoreVersion}/el8/$basearch/
gpgkey=https://yum.theforeman.org/pulpcore/{PulpcoreVersion}/GPG-RPM-KEY-pulpcore
enabled=1
gpgcheck=1
module_hotfixes=1
endif::[]

[leapp-foreman-plugins]
name=Foreman plugins {ProjectVersion}
baseurl=https://yum.theforeman.org/plugins/{ProjectVersion}/el8/$basearch
enabled=1
gpgcheck=0
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-foreman
module_hotfixes=1

[leapp-foreman-client]
name=Foreman client {ProjectVersion}
baseurl=https://yum.theforeman.org/client/{ProjectVersion}/el8/$basearch
enabled=1
gpgcheck=1
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-foreman-client

[leapp-puppet7]
name=Puppet 7 Repository el 8 - $basearch
baseurl=http://yum.puppetlabs.com/puppet7/el/8/$basearch
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-puppet7-release
       file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-2025-04-06-puppet7-release
enabled=1
gpgcheck=1
----

* You need a Puppet repository for the Puppet agent that the installer is using.

. We do not support {EL} 9 installations with EPEL 9 enabled, so remove `epel-release`:
+
----
# yum remove epel-release
----

> . Remove `centos-release-scl` and `centos-release-scl-rh` repositories:
> +
> ----
> # yum remove centos-release-scl centos-release-scl-rh
> ----

Reviewer: that's el7-only, so:
```suggestion
```

endif::[]

> . Configure Leapp to skip updating the Tomcat packages to ensure the upgrade does not fail:
> +
> ----
> # echo tomcat >> /etc/leapp/transaction/to_remove
> # echo tomcat-lib >> /etc/leapp/transaction/to_remove
> ----
> 

Reviewer: crude hack, not needed
```suggestion
```

. Let Leapp analyze your system:
+
----
# leapp preupgrade
----
ifdef::satellite[]
+
If you run {Project} in a disconnected environment, add the `--no-rhsm` and `--enablerepo` parameters:
+
[options="nowrap", subs="+quotes,verbatim,attributes"]
----
# leapp preupgrade \
--no-rhsm \
--enablerepo BaseOS \
--enablerepo AppStream \
--enablerepo {RepoRHEL9ServerSatelliteServerProductVersion} \
--enablerepo {RepoRHEL9ServerSatelliteMaintenanceProductVersion}
----
endif::[]

+
The first run is expected to fail but report issues and inhibit the upgrade.
Examine the report in the `/var/log/leapp/leapp-report.txt` file, answer all questions (using `leapp answer`), and manually resolve the other reported problems.
+

> The following commands show the most common steps required:
> +
> ----
> # rmmod pata_acpi
> # echo PermitRootLogin yes | tee -a /etc/ssh/sshd_config
> # leapp answer --section remove_pam_pkcs11_module_check.confirm=True
> ----
> +
> If `leapp preupgrade` inhibits the upgrade with *Unsupported network configuration* because there are multiple legacy named network interfaces, follow the instructions shown by Leapp to rename the interfaces, followed by an installer run to reconfigure {Project} or {SmartProxy} to use the new interface names:
> +
> [options="nowrap" subs="attributes"]
> ----
> # {foreman-installer} --help |grep 'interface.*eth'
>     --foreman-proxy-dhcp-interface  DHCP listen interface (current: "eth0")
>     --foreman-proxy-dns-interface  DNS interface (current: "eth0")
> ----
> +
> If `eth0` was renamed to `em0`, call the installer to use the new interface name with:
> +
> [options="nowrap" subs="attributes"]
> ----
> # {foreman-installer} --foreman-proxy-dhcp-interface=em0 --foreman-proxy-dns-interface=em0
> ----
> 

Reviewer: Those are not the most common failures for el8-to-el9, so I'd kick that part and re-introduce once we get reports that anything is needed
```suggestion
```

. Ensure `leapp preupgrade` has no issues.

. Run:
+
----
# leapp upgrade
----

ifdef::satellite[]
+
If you run {Project} in a disconnected environment, add the `--no-rhsm` and `--enablerepo` parameters:
+
[options="nowrap", subs="+quotes,verbatim,attributes"]
----
# leapp upgrade \
--no-rhsm \
--enablerepo BaseOS \
--enablerepo AppStream \
--enablerepo {RepoRHEL8ServerSatelliteServerProductVersion} \
--enablerepo {RepoRHEL8ServerSatelliteMaintenanceProductVersion}
----
endif::[]

. Reboot the system.
+
After the system reboots, a live system conducts the upgrade, reboots to fix SELinux labels, then reboots into the final {EL} 8 system.

. Leapp finishes the upgrade, watch it with:
+
----
# journalctl -u leapp_resume -f
----

> ifndef::satellite[]
> . Reindex the databases:
> +
> [options="nowrap" subs="+quotes,attributes"]
> ----
> # runuser -u postgres -- reindexdb -a
> ----
> endif::[]

Reviewer: this is done by leapp
```suggestion
```

ifdef::satellite[]
. Complete these procedures in  _Upgrading from RHEL 8 to RHEL 9_:  
.. Unlock packages:
+
[options="nowrap" subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
# {foreman-maintain} packages unlock
----
.. https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/upgrading_from_rhel_7_to_rhel_8/verifying-the-post-upgrade-state-of-the-rhel-8-system_upgrading-from-rhel-7-to-rhel-8[Verifying the post-upgrade state of the RHEL 8 system]
.. https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/upgrading_from_rhel_7_to_rhel_8/performing-post-upgrade-tasks-rhel-7-to-rhel-8_upgrading-from-rhel-7-to-rhel-8[Performing post-upgrade tasks]
.. Lock packages:
+
[options="nowrap" subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
# {foreman-maintain} packages lock
----
endif::[]

> . For {Project} only and not {SmartProxy}, if you require SELinux to be in enforcing mode, run the following command before changing SELinux to enforcing mode:
> +
> [options="nowrap", subs="+quotes,verbatim,attributes"]
> ----
> ifdef::foreman-el[]
> # dnf reinstall foreman-selinux --disableplugin=foreman-protector
> endif::[]
> ifdef::katello,satellite,orcharhino[]
> # dnf reinstall foreman-selinux katello-selinux --disableplugin=foreman-protector
> endif::[]
> ----

Reviewer: the bug that required these to be reinstalled got fixed, so
```suggestion
```
